From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[music]
The war in Iran has had some visible
consequences like skyrocketing energy
costs and higher gas [music] prices. But
the effects of this war are often far
less obvious and much more serious for
the world's most vulnerable people.
Today, my colleague Peter Goodman
[music] tells us about what he learned
on a recent trip to Somalia and why the
[music] system of global aid is no
longer in a position to help.
[music]
It's Wednesday, June 10th.
Peter Goodman, welcome back to the
Daily.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> So, Peter, we're now 101 days into the
war with Iran, and we have talked a lot
on the show about its effect on gas
prices, but you cover global supply
chains, which means that you've gone all
over the world. You've reported on how
something gets from point A to point B,
and you have focused a lot on all the
people who are affected in between. So
for that reason, we wanted to ask you
for your take on how the war has
disrupted things all over the world in
less visible ways. Well, first of all,
the price of energy goes so far beyond
putting gas in your car, right? I mean,
we've seen cooking fuel get scarce in
India, in South America. We've seen the
Philippines limit the hours that people
can work in office buildings to limit
the cost of air conditioning. We've seen
helium which is used by computer chip
factories from Taiwan get expensive and
hard to secure. The ripple effects of
this are almost infinite.
>> Reminds me of the butterfly effect. A
butterfly flaps its wings in one place
and you see a tidal wave in another.
>> Right. I mean this particular butterfly
is coming out of the straight of Hormuz
which is the conduit for something like
1/5if of the world's oil supply and
something like a third of major forms of
fertilizer which affects how much food
that we can grow. And so the
consequences of this particular flapping
of wings are especially enormous.
>> In addition to these kind of ripple
effects, there are also significant
issues of life and death. And that's
what I've been focusing on. I've been
looking at 60 or so countries that tend
to suffer from malnutrition even in the
best of times. And every time there's a
shock, we have reason to worry. And now
we have a big reason to worry because
the price of food and fertilizer is
going up very quickly in many parts of
the world. And we in wealthy countries
decided to dismantle large parts of the
international humanitarian relief
system. This is the safety net that
dates all the way back to the end of
World War II. And then we in the United
States and Israel decided to launch this
war.
>> The aid cuts that you referred to, the
US aid cuts of course refer to USAD. We
covered this on the show. That was
something that happened very early on in
the second Trump administration.
>> Yes, I mean that's a critically
important part of the story, but it's
far from the only part. I mean, in
addition, major European donors like the
United Kingdom, like Germany have also
pulled back. And this is in part because
the Trump administration has pressed
European allies to spend more money on
their own defense or financing NATO as
opposed to in the Trump view just
relying on the good graces and large of
the United States. And so in London in
Berlin major governments have also cut
back significantly on overseas aid and
that has contributed to to this picture.
So let me give you an example. You know,
four years ago when Russia invaded
Ukraine, there were similar fears about
a fertilizer crisis and hits to food
security because Russia and Ukraine
together produce a lot of grain. They
also produce a lot of the peace parts
for fertilizers. And so from Egypt to
Indonesia, there were worries about the
price of bread and grains.
>> And the energy prices did go up because
of that war too. It's not unfounded,
right? No. the these were real effects.
In fact, I went to Nigeria back in 2023
to write about the shock to the
fertilizer situation and it was pretty
dire. But here's what was different.
There was $43 billion in international
humanitarian relief led by 17 billion
from the United States that got
marshaled to take on this crisis and
staved off famine in places like Sudan,
South Sudan, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, and
Somalia.
>> So when the war in Ukraine shocked the
world economy, the humanitarian system
more or less worked.
>> Exactly. And then came the war in Iran.
And this time we're in a moment where
the politics are completely different.
And much of the developed wealthy world
is pulling back. And so now we're in a
situation where we've got tremendous
need for aid. We've got climate crisis
around the world. And yet we've seen
international humanitarian relief drop
from 43 billion in 2022 to 28 billion
last year and it's still coming down.
>> Do you feel like the US's allies looked
at the cuts that the US was making to
USAD and thought okay well if the US is
cutting it we can cut it too. Like do
you think the US almost gave our NATO
allies permission to cut their own
humanitarian programs?
>> Yes and no. I mean, look, the Nordic
countries and the European Union as a
block are still holding the line on
overseas aid. And yet, the political
appeal in many countries, and especially
this one, the United States, of saying,
"Hey, how about we solve problems at
home instead of trying to save starving
kids in some far away place that I'll
never visit." That has a lot of
political punch. Mhm.
>> Now, I think it's important to remember
that while politically it's sometimes
very convenient for people to attack
overseas aid and treat it like it's just
sort of a discretionary type of charity.
The people who designed it and continue
to advocate for this system have argued
that, you know, in addition to the
humanitarian aims, it's also been an
instrument of foreign policy. It's
traditionally been about national
security policy. And while it might be
tempting to say, well, what do people in
some faraway place have to do with the
voter in Ohio or New Jersey or wherever?
History tells us that when you leave
tens of millions of people in a
situation where they don't have enough
food to eat, they're already difficult
lives become that much more traumatic.
That can play out a lot of different
ways, but they're not good. First of
all, you could end up with the mother of
all migration crisis. Now, I'm not here
to to fearmonger about immigration, but
if your perspective is you don't want
millions of people heading to the Darian
Gap in Panama or uh streaming toward
places like Greece and Turkey and on
toward Northern Europe, well, you got to
give a thought to what's going to happen
if you remove all of this aid and then
add on an enormous crisis. You're
describing a bunch of reasons why people
risk everything to travel to other
countries in search of a better life.
Hunger, climate change, desperation, and
all of that, as you're describing, is
poised to get even worse because of the
shocks caused by the Iran war.
>> Right. People are not going to sit in
their villages and starve.
>> People are going to go to where they can
better support their families. And the
worse the crisis gets, the more likely
that people will be on the move. It's
also worth reminding people that, you
know, al-Shabaab, which is this al Qaeda
affiliated Islamist militia, is active
in the Horn of Africa. And certainly
trauma like famine, provides recruits.
It's it's another societal shock,
>> right? There are a lot of reasons why it
might be bad for a country to become,
for lack of a better term, a failed
state.
>> That's right. What happens when a state
sinks into absolute dysfunction? That
can play out a lot of different ways.
They're generally not good and it it's
not tenable for the rest of the world to
pretend that it's living in some sort of
giant gated community. You know, gated
community as national security policy
tends not to work very well,
>> right? So, you know, I was already
thinking about places I could go to
illustrate the crisis from rising
fertilizer prices and malnutrition. And
I was talking to aid groups around the
world. And then I had a conversation
with Mercy Corps, this American aid
organization that I had known from
traveling with them in Nigeria to write
about the fertilizer crisis back in
2023. And they suggested that I think
about going to Somalia.
>> [music]
>> a country that is especially susceptible
to climate change, drought. [music]
My reflexive take on that was that
Somalia was not a place on my map of
potential places to do reporting because
it's traditionally thought of as very
difficult, dangerous, but they suggested
that it would be possible. And as I saw
how dependent Somalia was on not only
imported food but also imported
fertilizer coming out of the straight of
Hormuz,
>> I realized that it was the perfect place
to see up close this grave [music] test
of what one person put it to me as the
postaid era.
[music]
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Okay. So, Peter, talk to us about your
trip to Somalia. What did you find going
on there?
>> Well, it's important to say right at the
top that Somalia was already in a very
precarious situation before the war
started. There was, you know, as I
mentioned before, a severe drought.
There had been several droughts in a
row. These had devastated the food
supply. You've got armed conflict. And
then you've got these dramatic cuts to
the aid system before this war.
>> So Somalia imports something like 70% of
its food and 90% of its energy. And
because so much shipping has been
disrupted by the shutdown of the Strait
of Hormuz and to a lesser extent the Red
Sea, you've got several weeks of delays
getting supplies into ports in the Horn
of Africa. And so the price of food and
fuel has more than doubled since the
war.
>> You're describing a series of cascading
events that all could lead to these
potentially catastrophic results. I want
to go through them one by one. Let's
start with the food situation,
>> right? So, in Moadishu, which is the
capital of Somalia,
I went to a fish market and there were
these guys wielding machetes to hack
sharks and tuna into steaks.
I talked to a a woman who was running a
stand there, Fatu Manor, and she was
telling me that wholesale prices have
gone up because the fishing boats can't
afford to buy as much diesel as they
used to, which means they can't go out
to the deeper waters where the biggest
fish are. They're staying closer to the
shore, which is depleting the catch,
which is limiting the supply of fish.
So, she has to pay more and as a result,
she has to charge her customers more.
her sales are down half and she's
actually worried about going bankrupt as
a result of this.
>> And Somalia, of course, is a country
where a lot of people already had
trouble affording food,
>> of course.
>> But what about the people who even
before the Iran war could not afford to
go to this market and purchase the
sharks that are being cut up, the fish
that she is selling? What have they been
doing since prices have only gone up?
>> Yeah. I mean, I talked to I don't even
know how many families who said, "We
don't know where our next meal is coming
from. We're lucky if we can feed our
children one meal a day. Lots of
families are now subsisting on, you
know, sorghum porridge with weeds that
they're finding by river banks and the
drought is even eliminating that.
>> This is the drought that existed before.
>> But what struck me was how UNICEF, for
one example, they're trucking water to
drought afflicted areas and they were
already dealing with budget cuts. Well,
now the price of diesel goes up. So, the
price of trucking that water is much
more expensive. So, now they're trucking
less water. Well, now that they're
trucking less water, there are more
people in need who can no longer stay in
the places that used to be relying upon
that water. They have to go move
somewhere in search of aid in the places
like the ones I visited in camps along
the Ethiopian border.
>> So, what did you see when you visited
those camps and what did the people
there tell you?
>> Yeah. Well, this was gutting. On my
first day in the town of Doolo on the
Ethiopian border, the sort of place
where traditionally large international
relief groups, World Food Program,
UNICEF have clustered. I met a family
that had left a rural area where the
drought had been particularly severe. It
had killed their 50 head of cattle.
That's their life savings. Once that's
gone, they've got nothing. Meanwhile,
the rivers have dried up. They can't
grow any food. So, they walked for nine
days.
>> Wow.
>> Carrying their three-year-old daughter
on their backs. And they get there to
Doolo and they discover that all of
these international relief groups,
almost all of them, have abandoned the
area. There's no help.
>> Did they tell you how it felt to arrive
only to find out that this was just an
aid camp with no aid? I mean, they were
in disbelief and they understood like
most of the people in these camps, they
can't go back. They set up a tent
alongside hundreds of others with some
plastic sheeting that gets donated by
some other people in the camp. They find
some sticks and they set up this shelter
and they're just waiting and hoping that
some aid will return.
>> What you are describing is a mass
starvation crisis in the making, if not
already here. Can you talk a little bit
about what treatment is available for
people who do not have enough food, for
these children who do not have enough
food, and has that changed also as a
result of the war?
>> Yeah, that's changed dramatically.
>> I think maybe the most harrowing thing I
saw, I was taken to a uh a UNICEF wart
of a hospital in Moadishu where the most
severe malnourishment cases are taken.
[crying]
This hospital has seen a doubling of
cases in the last few months. This is
since the disruptions of the war. I saw
babies needing feeding tubes and oxygen
to be kept alive.
>> Is this okay?
Thank you.
>> And I talked through a translator with a
mother who was sitting next to her
18-month-old baby boy leaning up
alongside her.
>> So she's saying the river dried up so
they cannot cultivate.
>> So they lost their crop. So they got
hungry and her son began vomiting.
>> Yeah. They have to give us injections.
And when her infant son couldn't hold
down any food, she had to beg to get $24
to get her child to the city in a place
where farm labors are making a dollar a
day. And he was actually a quote unquote
positive outcome.
>> Oh, that's it. Another three to four
days.
>> He was about to be discharged.
>> Okay, great.
>> Thank you. Thank you so much.
>> We're thinking of you. But here was the
part of this that was most striking to
me. The doctors there told me a third of
these cases they think could have been
avoided had these kids been assessed and
treated earlier. Now UNICEF has been
forced to close 205 health and nutrition
centers throughout Somalia. If those
centers were still there, then a lot of
these kids ending up in the hospital
needing oxygen to breathe and feeding
tubes to stay alive would be treated and
assessed earlier, but that capacity has
been dismantled.
>> Peter, you mentioned that Somalia was
already facing a cascading series of
crises even before the Iran war,
>> right?
>> Do we have any way to quantify how much
worse the humanitarian crisis has
gotten? Well, let me put it to you this
way. In February, so this is before the
impacts of the Iran war, the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization warns that
there are 6 and 12 million people in
Somalia. That's about a third of the
population that are suffering hunger at
levels that are deemed an emergency. And
early last year, the World Food Program,
which is the largest source of food aid
in the country, has funds to serve as
many as 2 million people a month.
>> Well, when I was there, this is late
April, early May, they were down to
funds that were adequate to serve
300,000 people a month. And that was
going to run out at the end of June.
>> So from 2 million to 300,000 a month and
no more come July. Correct. And I
actually got a snapshot of this aid
running out in real time in Somalia.
>> 7,500.
>> So I went to visit a world food program
warehouse.
>> This is 2 months supply.
>> Yeah. 2 months supply.
>> Okay.
>> This is a place that felt like a
fortress, you know, high walls topped by
barbed wire.
>> Supplying the region basically with
food. And I walked through that facility
with the director, Josephine Mully.
>> Josephine, so when you first started
here two years ago,
>> how many of these tents were full?
>> Basically, we used to have full
capacity.
>> She showed me these 13 A-frame tents
that normally would be full of food aid.
And 12 of these 13 tents were empty. So,
we're in the one tent that actually does
have some supplies and it's
>> We went inside this one tent that was
full and there were these brown cartons,
>> cardboard boxes stamped with the US aid
logo and American [snorts] flags says
made in USA.
>> They were full of plumpy nut, which is
this peanut rich nutrient paste that's
fed to malnourished children and
pregnant and breastfeeding moms. And
this was the last of it. there was
nothing else in the pipeline
>> up to June June July
>> right
>> if we don't get any funding we'll be dry
completely completely we can't respond
>> and I asked the director quite bluntly
and then what happens to the population
what are you going to do
>> I would ask you the same question what
happens when you don't have anything to
give what do you give
>> and get desperate and see people really
>> it it really brought home for me that
these aid workers are now in a position
where they're having to contemplate this
hierarchy of suffering where you know as
one food program official put it to me
who lives today and who dies in in two
weeks.
>> Peter, how representative is what you
saw in Somalia of the downstream effects
of this war in the other countries that
you have been focused on? Well, look,
Somalia goes into this crisis especially
vulnerable, but it is very much
representative in that the trajectory is
the same. So, in Sudan, which is widely
considered the world's most dire
humanitarian crisis at the moment, where
you already have parts of the country in
officially declared famine. Well, now in
Port Sudan, the primary gateway for food
aid in Sudan, you have stuff coming in
weeks later and then the head of UNICEF
for Sudan told me it's difficult to get
that stuff trucked to places that are
stricken by famine because not only is
the price of diesel so expensive, but
the trucking companies are unwilling to
take the risk of bringing their trucks
into the hinderland because there are
actual physical shortages of diesel fuel
They're worried they're going to get
stuck there.
>> They're worried they're going to get
stuck there. So, I just came back from
Ivory Coast, which is one of the fastest
growing economies on on Earth. This is
in West Africa. And there you have cocoa
farmers who have already been suffering
from dramatically reduced prices for
their crops. Now, they're looking at
increased prices for fertilizer, which
means lower yields, lower livelihoods,
and on it goes.
>> [snorts]
>> Peter, one of the things that we have
talked about on this show a lot since
the war began was that even if it ended
tomorrow, even if the straight of Hormuz
opened tomorrow, enough damage has been
done to energy infrastructure in the
Persian Gulf that the disruptions to
energy supplies could go on for years.
And I wonder whether you foresee that
same kind of more lasting disruption in
the countries that we've talked about
today.
Look, a lot of what we're talking about
here will change people's lives forever.
Now, will some of it return to normal
when the straight reopens? Maybe some of
it. Sure, fuel prices presumably will go
back down. Fertilizer will be more
available and and food prices could come
back down and that could have a lot of
benefit. But you have to look at things
a little more expansively than that. I
mean, again, think about the butterfly
effect. All of the ripple effects that
can't be undone in a few weeks or maybe
even years. I mean, I went to a training
program in Doolo in Somalia that used to
be funded by USAD. It trained people to
be seamstresses. And when I was there,
they had no threat. They didn't have
chemicals for their sewing machines. And
enrollment had crashed. Now, this is not
the most acutely needed sort of program
if you're thinking about feeding people
tomorrow, but it's vital in terms of
building up some upward mobility.
[snorts] Think about that times a
million. [music]
You know, Rachel, I've been doing this
sort of work a long time. I spent a lot
of time in conflict zones and disasters.
You know, in 2004, I was in Thailand the
day of the tsunami. I went to Indonesia
and I saw and heard stories that will
haunt me forever.
I saw 200 bodies in Thailand set up at
this makeshift morg lying out in the
sun. I heard parents recounting how
their children had been yanked out of
their arms by this wave.
>> I mean, I don't really like the sort of
Olympics of suffering. And yet what I
saw in Somalia was enraging as well as
gutting because what happened in the
Indian Ocean tsunami was as they say an
act of God and what I was seeing in
Somalia was the product of a series of
political decisions. It was made by
human beings.
You have hundreds of millions of people
who by dent of climate change, cuts to
the aid system, the impacts of the war
are now in these sort of purgatory
situations and we're still at the
beginning stages of it. There's a long
way down to go from here.
>> Peter Goodman, thank you so much.
>> Thank you so much, Rachel. [music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
Early Wednesday morning, the United
States and Iran exchanged military
attacks in the Middle East. A severe
escalation after the downing of an
American helicopter gunship earlier in
the week. [music]
Acting on orders from President Trump,
US Central Command launched what it
called self-defense operations near the
Strait of Hormuz, [music]
striking Iranian air defenses, ground
control stations, and surveillance radar
sites. The scale of the damage is not
yet clear. In response, Iran claimed
[music] to launch drone strikes
targeting the US Navy's fifth fleet in
Bahrain along with 21 attacks on US
bases [music] across the region.
But US officials report that nearly all
of the incoming missiles and drones were
intercepted and there have been no
reports of American casualties or
[music] damage to US bases according to
initial American assessments.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Adrienne Hurst, Michelle Bona, and
Claire Tennis Getter with help from
Diana Wyn. It was [music] edited by
Chris Hackel and Michael Benois with
help from Liz O Balin and contains music
by Dan [music] Powell and Leah Shaw
Deon. Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.